Appreciate,
your honor.
How many?
Thank you. Thank you.
Right. So we've got an, uh, two hours with you, so, um,
it will be quite a long time.
Um, so you know about structured agenda.
We'll won't slavishly follow,
but we'll try as much as possible, um,
to use it as a bit of a indication.
So, uh, Mr. Lipford, I'll leave it over to you to, uh,
introduce your team and just do a few introductory comments.
Turn. Thank you, uh, Mr. Chair.
Good afternoon, uh, to all committee members.
Um, good to see you. I've got, um, Lee Marsh,
the Commissioner of custodial services to my left,
and Alice Shahar, the Deputy Chief Executive
of stretching corporate services to my rights.
Also accompanied by a range of, um, yeah, great, um,
representatives from the organization.
And we've also got a, um, member there, union partners, uh,
perhaps Association New Zealand, Floyd ies.
So it's great that, um, uh,
unions are also are here from a select committee process.
Um, if I can just by start,
by reaffirming corrections commitment
for our three organizational outcomes
of improved public safety, reduced reoffending,
and addressing the over representation of Maori.
Uh, they remain at the heart of everything we do.
These aspiration, these outcomes are not just aspirations.
They guide every decision we make and drive what we do
and how we do it every day.
I record here my immense admiration
and thanks to the 11,000, uh, members
of the corrections team who dedicate themselves every day
to achieving these outcomes.
More than 90%
of our people are on the front line facing situations
that are often demanding and dangerous every day.
They bring courage, care,
and a deep commitment to safety, not just for themselves,
but for their colleagues, our communities,
and those we are supporting to leave us better
and with brighter prospects.
I'm genuinely proud of the way they look out for one another
and work together to ensure
that everyone can finish their work safely
and return home to their loved ones
despite the challenges they face.
Our people create environments where real
and meaningful positive change can happen.
These success stories may not always make headlines,
but they are the reason so many choose to be part
of the corrections family.
They see the difference We make one person
and one day at a time.
We've seen a marked shift in our workforce over the
past, uh, three years.
Frontline staffing levels continue to rise
and turn over to the 30th of June.
This year has fallen to 8.3%, almost half of
what it was three years ago.
This tells me we have people who are committed
to corrections as a career, not just as a job.
Of course, we're a large organization working
with incredibly complex issues and people,
and there will always be challenges.
We are preparing for the pressures we anticipate
and remain adaptable to address any others that may arise.
One of the most significant pressures we face is the
increase in the prison population.
We put a lot of work into future capacity, both in terms
of physical infrastructure as well as staffing.
Our long-term network configuration plan sets out key
projects until 2045.
This will ensure we have sufficient modern
and fit for purpose, prison capacity
to meet anticipated growth and evolving needs.
Recent milestones include the opening
of the new site at Wikia Prison,
adding 500 new high security beds
and 96 dedicated beds for people
with mental health and addiction needs.
We have entered the construction phase
for high security unit Hawke's Bay Regional Prison,
and we are progressing the procurement at Christchurch Men's
Prison, uh, to further expand high security
and mental health capacity.
We're also reopening
and repurposing existing capacity
to house increasing prison numbers.
I've noticed the growth in the women's prison population,
which increased by 22% in the 24 to 25 year,
while the men's population rose 11% of the same period.
Although the actual number
of women entering the network is smaller,
it is a significant increase to manage.
This corrections opened 218 additional beds between July
of last year and June of this.
As at this June,
the women's network had an operating capacity of 964
for a population of 798.
Another challenge is the large proportion of people on remar
and the increasing needs to deliver effective services
to each of these prisoners.
Where possible corrections does not determine
who is in prison or in the community,
nor do we decide who is on remand or sentenced.
The foundations of the correction system are historically
designed to manage sentences.
The growth and change in the remand population has
fundamentally altered how people move
through the criminal justice system and access programs
and services, especially rehabilitation.
In response corrections has been
and continues to be focused on delivering more effective
and efficient services.
We wanna ensure we are providing programs
and services that deliver the strongest outcomes in terms
of reducing re-offending
and keeping the public safe in budget.
24, the government committed funding
to extend rehabilitation services to remand prisoners
with funds available from the 1st of July of this year.
Since then, we've expanded our suite of services
and are focused on further improving the effectiveness
of rehabilitation delivery to remand prisoners.
We intend to continue refining and improving our programs
and services throughout 2026.
It will take time to get the optimum suite in place
to meet the needs of our changing prison population.
The increase in remand prisoners
and managing their unique needs makes this a
complex program of work.
But we are committed to building a tailored
and effective approach to rehabilitation so
that people leave us better and with brighter prospects.
Of course, our work extends well beyond the prison gates,
and I wanna acknowledge the equally vital role
of our community corrections team.
On any given day, our community corrections colleagues
managed around 24,000 individuals serving sentences
and orders, administering nearly 32,000
unique sentences and orders.
This year, 76%
of people successfully completed their
community-based sentence or order.
97% of those were who are non-compliant were held
to account by our people.
We've continued to invest in electronic monitoring
with our national team operating 24 7 to support compliance
and keep communities safe.
Importantly, our approach is not just about enforcement,
it's about rehabilitation and reintegration.
And over 3,500 rehabilitation programs
with staff in the community.
This year. Our community corrections people face their own
unique challenges, often working in unpredictable
and sometimes risky environments.
Their professionalism, empathy,
and resilience are a credit to our organization
and a foundation on a foundation that drives public safety.
As we look ahead, we remain committed
to strengthening our relationship with iwi, pu whanau,
and community organizations in support
of continually improving the way we support people
to leave us better and with brighter prospects.
As we look to the coming year, our goals remain firm,
improve public safety, reduce re-offending,
and addressing Maori over representation.
Achieve this, we remain committed to investing.
What delivers? We just vote there needs. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. Good. I'm happy to answer your questions.
Right now, we are gonna, um,
start talking about audit findings, right?
Who wants call for audit findings?
Anyone audit findings?
Can I, well, I'll start with the first question.
So what was the difference in the valuation
of the white period prison?
The, um, uh, process for us in our valuations, um,
dates back to, um, April, 2022, um, when
we were first anticipating the completion of, um,
the construction phase in that, um,
facility being operationally available.
Mm-hmm. Uh, since then, um, we have
recognized the finance payments flowing, um,
to the consortium, which is the negotiated
we reached at that point.
Um, and this year we crystallized the operational stage
of the assets, which then allowed us
to recognize all of those pre-cost.
I might just ask our Chief financial officer, Neil Phipps.
Yeah, just to answer that question,
uh, the revaluation, um, that's
Under tape. Just
Need to come, just come up, come on up
Chair.
We don't mind if people come up back and forth. It's
Just for the mics.
Yeah. So,
Um, the revaluation undertaken at,
at the year end is across all
and the building assets of which Y carrier
is a component of that.
Yeah, as Jeremy said.
So, because the asset completion for Y Carrier
occurred within the last financial year by 30 June, 2025,
it's folded into that revaluation.
So it's basis of recognition changed.
So we go from recognizing a cost basis
as we are building y carrier asset up to that
revaluation basis.
And so it, along with the rest of the portfolio
of London building's, uh, valuation changed at that point.
And how much by that? Uh, y Keer was
by about 454 500, uh, $400 million.
Yes. Yeah. Uh, overall, yeah.
Um, and then the rest of the portfolio increased,
and then you get the net
Difference. So what was the net
difference?
The net difference was around about $250 million
through the revaluation.
So why would it be 400 million?
That's a faired chunky sum of money for
The, the recognition criteria
between a revaluation at year end in the cost basis
is, is quite different.
The y carrier build had progressed over a long period
of time, including over the COVID COVID period.
Um, so it's really that planting technical difference
between a cost basis and then the reevaluation.
Okay. Now I've got a question from Ms. Paul.
Oh, um, yeah, KDA, first of all, just wanna say,
I've now been to every prison in New Zealand,
so I wanna give a big thanks to the managers at all
of the different sites across the country.
Um, it was really insightful, being able to be welcomed
by them and just have a look at everything
and they vary quite a bit.
Um, so just on this section, obviously a lot
of your money is going towards increasing prison capacity,
but I kind of wanna zoom in a little bit more
and talk about basic necessities.
So, um, people against prisons, alor,
they obviously a group advocating for prison abolition.
Uh, one of their most recent campaigns has been about, uh,
women in particular who don't have access
to basic necessities in prisons.
Things like underwear, things like tampons, pads, um,
these basic items.
Um, and I just wanna read out a quick sentence from them.
Necessary items are not being provided at all.
The number of items provided isn't sufficient
for hygienic purposes or
because the quality of these items
doesn't meet people's basic needs.
So I wanted to know, starting with something really basic,
what is corrections doing to make sure that people
Have Okay, got a question?
Yeah, those kinds of things. Alright,
Thank you. Um, well
I feel very assured
because I did ask, um,
that specific question when I saw the, um, in intended, um,
uh, interest from from from that group.
Uh, and it might be best if I ask Kim Gris
and who's the deputy commissioner for the Women's Network
to just come and talk about that.
Um, maybe frame it up from the women's strategy
and specific focus we've had in making sure we do have a
gender response, um, to women.
Um, some very specific things that we wanted
to get right in that context.
So we've made some significant improvements,
but I think just first maybe responding to the specifics
and then maybe talking about some of the more
general points, perhaps Kim.
Okay. Jeremy and thank you committee. And, um, thank you.
Um, Ms. Paul, I, I'm aware you've been across all three
sites and the Women's network
and to your point, the all differ.
So one of the big, uh, focus areas for me
as Deputy Commissioner Woman's is to make sure
that there is consistency
and specifically consistency in the provision
of basic need products.
It is, uh, an area of passion for me.
Uh, sites are funded to provide those necessities.
So, um, it's something that I'm working
with the general managers of each prison to ensure
that we have got good stores available.
Obviously with a higher remand increase we see in the
women's population, it means there is a bigger tune, um,
of people coming in and out.
So it's hugely important
that we've got good stocks available that is able to cater
to all women that come in recognizing that, you know,
there are various, um, sizes, there are different, um,
needs that women have.
So when they come in, do they have those basic product
Products? Okay. We
are gonna talk more about women's
population further in the agenda.
Um, any other financially orientated question? Mr. Ferris?
Have you got one financially orientated?
Yeah, Kilda. Alright.
Kilda, Jeremy Kilda to you and your team.
Um, looking across the audit, uh,
information we can't see anywhere
where you are tracking the effectiveness or
otherwise in a, from a financial point of view of the,
uh, performance of any of the Maori based programs.
Can you get, can you shed a bit of light on that for us
From a financial perspective in terms of what we,
what we spend the volumes that we've got?
Is, is that the Yeah, is that the question? Um, yeah,
That's the question. Yeah.
So, um, what,
what we have got is an appropriation in its entirety
for rehabilitation and reintegration services.
Uh, within that we have some very specific targeted
services such as the harpy
or reintegration services,
which opened last year up in, up in Auckland.
You'd be well aware of the hunger units.
Um, that's a, that's a kind of whole of community.
So there are services delivered in there,
but the, the culture, the Tik hunger of that whole unit, uh,
is I think what we should be accounting
for in terms of cost.
Uh, and then there are some very specific, um,
provisions made within our special treatment units, um,
supported by specialist Maori practitioners trying
to pull out the specific costs associated with,
um, services directly, uh, attributed for, um, Marty is,
is not a straightforward, uh, or trivial thing.
We continue to hunt at a very practical level, the
what evidence tells us is gonna have greatest impact, um,
and, and look very carefully at the services that we're able
to offer and the way in which we can enable those
by creating the right environments within our
prison units particularly. Um, and that's what, yeah,
So look, if I, if I dig in a bit further.
Yeah. Um, the, the question is, you know,
if you've got x amount of dollar value being invested into,
uh, Maori programs
and the target of those Maori programs has got to be the,
um, lowering of the overrepresentation
of Maori across corrections.
There, there doesn't seem to be any join up or,
or the details too low to see
where any money is being put in
and what effect is being made.
Sure. Um, the, the ability for us to do
that is very much around the data we've got
and the way in which we then can record, uh,
those insights we have at a reasonably aggregated level, uh,
a view in terms of impact the journeys people have
through our part of the wider criminal justice system,
what they're able to access.
Um, but I, the ability to, can I give to you that data?
Can I suggest Mr. Paris,
because we, we'll talk about overrepresentation
of Maori later on,
but I think what we might ask you is this very specific
question, give you time to go away and reflect on that
and maybe come back with a more specific answer.
Yeah, that'd be great. Right. I'm just conscious we are
meant to be moving on, on the agreed agenda, uh,
strategic direction, uh, Rangi refresh.
Do you wanna pick up the first question?
Is that all right? We can go straight into it.
Or did you wanna say a little?
Yeah, no, no, no, that's okay.
So my big thing is, you,
you're just talking about data just now.
Your data method collection and corrections is outdated
and you were told in, I think it's action 5.2, that one
of the do now actions is to bring corrections,
data collection, ethnicity, data collection up
to best practice in line with other government departments.
So why hasn't the department done that yet?
Because your Maori representation
statistics in prisons are incorrect.
Well, fir first lemme say, um, we,
we do capture primary ethnicity have done for a long time,
but we're also capturing, um, other, um, elements of, uh,
ethnicity as someone records it.
But maybe I'll just ask Alice, uh, just
to give you the specifics around what we do, capture
what the standards are,
and then we can maybe dive into it from there.
Yeah. Thanks Jeremy. Um, yeah, I can, I can confirm.
As you know, states New Zealand has a mandatory standard on
data collection, um, and corrections is compliant with that.
So we do ask people
to report all ethnicity and that is captured.
So we're compliant with that.
What we're not compliant
with is the draft standard on data reporting, um,
but reporting ethnicity.
Um, but thanks to the inquiries that have been made, I mean,
and when, when those inquiries are made, we are able
to report all ethnicity and do, um,
and thanks to the inquiries that have been made recently,
we will be doing that by default.
So it's not that we're not compliant with the collection,
we are, we're not compliant at the moment with reporting,
but we can be and we will be.
And I think, um, from a timing perspective
that you can expect to see the final quarter
of this calendar year, so the October
through December period being published on our public
website from February,
He's not even behind you.
That's reassuring. Yeah.
Very reassured. Particularly when
they're doing it from behind you.
Thank You, chair. I have one
more question then I'm gonna go here
Also just for that. So
by, was it the, did you say next year that you'll,
So the final quarter of this year?
Yeah, we will report in February of next year, um,
under those two one standard, one draft standard.
So we'll hook both on our website.
So you're gonna, you're gonna listen
to the action that in?
Yep. Cool. Awesome. That's great.
Right. I'm gonna go to Mr.
Jeremy. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um, now just, just talking on the haw, um, in regards
to the corrections long term strategy to improve outcomes
for Maori in collaboration with Maori.
Um, and I don't know whether this is a sub on the data set,
but what analysis has been completed to assess the impact
that the Regulatory Standards Act might have on corrections
ability to reduce the Maori incarceration through Ang?
Given that, and if there hasn't been any thinking around it,
um, I'd like to know when there would be some thinking
around it, uh,
because it would have an impact on our ability to be able
to gather data based on race, uh,
and to align with your annual review, uh, plan, um,
that is focused in, in the space of over incarceration
of Maori and impact of current government policies on this.
So I just wanted to ask whether you've had any thinking
around that, and if you haven't,
when will you do some thinking around? Thank
You. Thank you. Um,
Specifically not, um, that,
that piece of regulatory work,
what we've focused heavily on, um, has been about how we can
maximize access to the most important services
that have evidence of making a difference for Maori.
Um, so that's the bit that we've really, um, put,
put a lot of effort into.
Um, some of that has been about building relationships with
and actually having perhaps full, um, programs of work with
Iwi, hapu and fau.
Um, but actually our predominant focus is
what are the services and what are the things
that will make the biggest difference to reduce that
and have an impact on over representation
of Maori within a corrections context.
Given that a lot of, um, the experiences
of people coming into our part
of the criminal justice system certainly
predate our involvement.
So we are working with, um, people when they're with us
and what we're trying to do more
and more is build those connections that through care,
making sure that someone has an awareness of who they are,
where they've come from,
and those strong connections can be real rebuilt back
into their community.
And so for us, that's a lot of
what we've been putting our our effort into in terms
of being, building meaningful relationships, understanding
where there might be strategic alliances with an iwi
or PU who might wanna focus on the same things as us,
and who then with us can ensure that services are available,
not just while whilst they're with us under a sentence
or an order, but that carry on and endure.
Um, because we are only a short slice
of time with, with most people. Um, that's
Okay. Hey, um,
we're gonna have quite a
session on a representation.
I think we're all really interested in it. Yeah.
Um, we are doing a specific, uh, at the moment, Mr.
Ferris, I hope you're related to the current, um,
strategic plan or is yours new point?
Um, no, too. Okay. Alright. So I'll let you go ahead.
Okay. Kilda, Jeremy. Hey, you, you and I
and your team have had, uh, probably three discussions now,
ongoing ones through scrutiny winks, uh, weeks and
before select committee about how you intend
to track the performance of Hawkey.
And I've challenged you on there not being any targets
and you've given reasoning
for not having having any targets.
Um, I acknowledge you've refreshed the haw strategy,
but we note that the accountabilities framework
remains the same.
So how
and when are you going
to address the accountability framework shortfall, um,
associated with the Haw Kai Rangi program?
And I'm asking you this because how can you, uh,
and your whole team hand on heart, uh, present information,
uh, to the public, to TEI Maori that demonstrates
how haw rangi is performing or not?
How are you gonna do that?
Well, as you've acknowledged,
what we have done this time in our haw rangi, um,
refreshed strategy is set out our performance framework,
which is at the back end of the document, um,
restating the outcomes
and being clear about the four areas
that we think will have the greatest impact
to achieve those outcomes.
So safe, secure, and humane system foundations
for participation, those things
that we think will enable people to leave us
with an improvement in their ability.
Um, so we are definitely hunting some things in there which
are going to demonstrate that connection that I was talking,
um, talking to earlier.
Um, and safe supported
and capable staff is another key component to ensure
that there is appropriate cultural capability to ensure
that connection can be made authentic, um, uh,
meaningful engagements can be, um, established
and need progressively understood as people are working
with an individual and their wider f final and support.
Uh, and then the final one, which I talked to, um, again,
briefly, was the partnering
for equitable outcomes impact area.
Not to partner for the sake of partnering,
but to partner purposefully to have relationships
or have a meaningful connection
for those people in the system.
So as, as you will, um, perhaps note what sits
underneath those impact areas in terms of the things
that we wanna measure, is the shift
that we are looking to make.
Um, and I would say it's been pretty challenging actually
for us to be able to land on things
that we can hand on heart, say are the right things for us
to measure that move us away from the measures
that traditionally have been done.
The how many programs have been achieved,
what are the starts, what are the completions, what are the,
what are the kind of, um, for want of a better word, um,
tactical measurement of things to a little more of the,
what's the future state that we would like
to be describing if each of those four impact areas was to,
was to frame a, a kind of change or a difference.
And then how do we measure for those attributes
that then get us into a slightly different, um, domain.
We've had a few sessions on that.
Alice might be able to reflect on that as well. I think
We'll pick this up a bit later.
Okay. Pick this up. I've got two more questions to go.
I'm gonna Sure. Open a new line of ING from Dr. Lenner.
No, it's not a new line of question. This is the question.
This is the, the kind of gut the matter here. So Absolutely.
To let you fundamentally, uh,
I think we're all in agreement.
There's been a refresh Yeah.
But the, the, the measurements remain the same.
So it's a little bit confusing about where the direction,
why refresh something if you're not going to, to measure it.
And I'd like you to continue that. Yeah.
So Bear in mind that the, the environment's changed,
the prison numbers have gone up.
Yep. We've talked about women, um, overrepresentation.
So I'm, I'm really keen for a clear understanding of
what those targets are gonna be.
Great. Or what the issue is
and deciding what they should be. Great.
Well, um, if I just finish that thought
and then hand to Alice maybe in terms of taking us into
that, into that next level of detail, the two important, uh,
additional artifacts I can describe 'em
as such in the refreshed ang strategy is
firstly the performance framework.
How does the intervention not, how,
how does the whole hang together
and what are the things that we are suggesting
will have the likely impact in achieving outcomes or not?
So I think inserting those impacts at the bottom
of the performance framework, really important step forward.
'cause you can kind of then hone in on what they are,
what we need to hunt into the future.
So that's number one. And then the other piece is the
organizational roadmap, which is, which is the kind
of companion page at the back of the document.
Those are things, five focus areas, some
of which are relatively rudimentary things
that any organization should have,
but some that I think are critically important, such
as leadership capability and culture and pathways
and services, which are intentionally saying
what are the things and what is the sequence of those things
that we think will lead us towards having greater impact.
So those are the, those are the two things we put a lot
of energy into in trying
to shape up a different path for us.
But I'll, I'll, I'll hand to Alice maybe
to describe some of that, that framing.
Yeah. What I'd also contribute to that.
Um, I think just building on what Jeremy said is
that haw isn't a program, haw is an organizational strategy.
So it speaks to everything that we do.
It speaks to every dollar that we spend.
Um, and it's really difficult to measure those things.
Um, we have got a range of things
that we report on publicly.
Um, some of them are at that outcome measurement level, some
of which is, you know, different to many organizations.
We do, in some respect, disclose our impact
that we're having, but we know that
that's not good enough for people.
We want to do better and we have to understand,
and we can, so we can, we can attribute specific dollars
that go to things with a Maori title to Maori provider
to Maori cultural cap capability investment
to Maori specific roles in our organization.
But we wanna make sure that every single
dollar is working for Maori.
We can't achieve one third
of our organizational outcomes
without infecting the both of them.
They, they all, three of them,
all three of them work together.
So we are focused on not just being able to count widgets,
but actually understanding how all of those dollars, all of
that investment works together
and is achieving the impact that we want for all
of our organizational outcomes.
So it's really difficult to say
specific things are having the impact for Maori
because we know that that's not the case.
All of our system has to be responsive.
Um, we are doing a number of detailed pieces of work
to understand the things that we are measuring
and whether those things are useful
for anyone internally or externally.
And we're totally open-minded as
to potentially next year going into change some
of those things that we report on, um, in our annual report,
for instance, so that it is more meaningful
and people can see the answers to the questions
that have been asked today.
'cause you can understand how it's difficult to,
to get excited about a new framework when we've got no way
of, of truly understanding, um, how it could work
rather than it being a retrospective attribution to
how you think it should work. Should work. Yeah. Yep.
Yeah. Importantly, we have to come up with
and be explicit around the intervention logic associated.
So we've gotta actually understand what it is
that we're investing in and why we're investing in it
before we start measuring it.
So that will be part of it. Okay.
Uh, honorable Duncan,
Around your wider strategy.
Um, earlier on, um, Jeremy, you
talked about what corrections is
and you made a statement, which I think is actually,
and I didn't write it down verbatim,
but it was essentially
that you have no control over when people
arrive or when they leave.
You just manage them when they're in their sentence.
And I guess I'm a wee bit concerned about that
because you're an integral part of the wider justice system
and is a real sad fact about justice system,
that there's a bit of recycling that goes on.
Um, and in terms of the strategic approach
that you've got, how do you seek to
one, ensure that people don't come back,
but also ensure that they get out
at the most opportune time
because you do actually have a degree of control
over the exit door in terms of preparing them
for release
and making them in the best position they can be for parole.
So I'm just interested in
how this strategy fits into the justice network
and how it can reduce offending over the long term.
Sure. It's a, as you'll appreciate quite a, quite a,
It's a tough question While we're here.
Big, big question. I will, I will, for the chair's benefit,
I will try and keep it short. Um, sorry.
Worry about him. Yeah, no, no. You do need,
I am very conscious about what we can and can't control.
So there are judicial and parole board, uh, decision makers
who determine the vast majority of those who flow out
of the custodial environment.
Obviously short serving prisoners who are on a sentence
of two years or less get released time served 50% of time,
um, of the, of their sentence.
So, so that, that add the construct, uh,
then takes you into the domain of us preparing people well,
us giving people the opportunity to ensure
that they have access, have had access to services
that address not just criminogenic need,
but all of the needs they might have for the first time
for maybe for some people ever understanding their physical
and mental health needs
because they're coming into an environment
where their needs are assessed.
Uh, and in the community they may choose not
to access any of those health services.
So it's an awful lot of things
that are being done on a short sentence.
Uh, our ability to be able
to track someone's progress whilst they're on remand
and then ensure that all of the services been delivered
before they are sentenced
and maybe released the next day on sentencing
or even go through
because they've got relatively serious offending
and they're gonna be sentenced to a period of imprisonment
for more than two years,
but their first parole eligibility date might
because they, they go, they go for a, a jury trial the day
after or the period immediately
after they have just been sentenced.
So, so I think, yes, there is always an opportunity for us
to do the best job we can,
hence why our focus at the moment on building an appropriate
and responsive approach
to rehabilitative services whilst people are on remand,
particularly that remand convicted space.
But I would describe it as a residual opportunity for us in
that, in that churn space, the shorter sentences,
because there is a flow out at quite a high pace
between the remand period
and the sentence where I'm more confident we can have a
really meaningful impact is those longer sentences
where we've got the opportunity to get stability and settled
and clearly identified need,
but sequenced services can be delivered to a person
and they can transition through our system
to leave us in a better state with brighter prospects.
And importantly, as I was saying earlier on,
have made those connections outside of us as an organization
and actually outside of the criminal justice system,
to actually have a home, actually have employment,
actually have access to services
and connection to support
that will make the biggest difference.
So those are the things that we can't directly, um,
deliver service on,
but we can definitely have influence in the relationships we
make and the motivations and incentives we drive for others.
So even those basic building blocks when someone leaves
prison, like having a an ID
and having a benefit lined up.
Yep. So they, they can, do you track
how effective you are at that because Yep.
Certainly one of the concerns is that people are getting,
finding themselves in the community
without the basic kind of, I don't know
what you'd call them, citizenship Yeah.
Admin basic attributes that enable people
to Yeah. Start to,
How are you doing that? So
I think pretty well based on everything
that I've just described in terms of the,
the high churn and yeah.
Uh, large volumes in the second impact area in our
performance framework that foundations for participation,
that is exactly as Alice has sort of described, the sort
of space that we are in, in determining what's going
to have greatest impact for us in knowing whether
or not some of those basic, um, elements
that someone might reasonably expect are being delivered.
Not necessarily that we can directly contribute in every
case, but how well are we making a recommendation?
Where's the service deficit if there is one in connecting
to another service provider?
'cause we are not a
large scale high volume housing support provider, right.
For the highest risk. Yes, there's limited numbers
of housing that we provide,
but that's not our, that's not our main job,
but we need to try and establish connections. So those are,
I'm just gonna state one concern.
'cause I guess my concern is siloing, right? Yep.
Last question that everyone is saying, that's not my job.
Yep. Um, and of course housing's a classic example Yep.
Where a prisoner leaving is
by definition a hard to house person.
Um, and everyone's kind of saying, well, it's not us.
Um, and if we do that enough, we're just gonna have
a whole group of people who are not going
to be looked at. Yeah.
Rest assured, we are focused on enabling the system
to see the need
and the demand, um, that we, we have visibility of,
obviously we provide supportive accommodation, particularly
that short term initial stabilization period.
And for high risk people, we make, make sure there is access
to safe and secure housing.
It's often a standard condition for parole board releases.
So it's not as though we are not in there.
I just, I just wanna acknowledge that
it is not our core work
and we have to be surfacing those areas of demand so
that the system as a whole, rather than corrections
or the justice system alone can see them.
Okay. Okay. Now we're gonna move to strategic financial,
uh, management, which is about linking the, oh, um, Mr.
Chair, Mr. Chair, can I just offer one more on guard?
No, no, no. We're gonna go Strategic financial management.
Uh, first question, who would like to bring that in context?
I've got multiple people asking questions.
Who would like to now talk
about strategic financial management?
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Right, Dr. McClennan. Thank
You. The annual report makes
clear that corrections had
to absorb obviously, um, population growth through, um,
some internal reprioritization while, um,
rehabilitation spending looks like it's dropped.
And I presume that's because, um, of the review process
and we can see that things like mental health clinicians de
delivered, um, fewer
contact hours over the last year
can, which,
and your, it's, I suppose things aren't lining up.
Um, and it leads to the, the overall question is what sort
of specific long term investments
given the increase in in prison population
and the increasing appropriation to account for that
are you making in to support
that rehabilitation reintegration program?
Sure. Um, So specifically
I think two years ago when we were talking,
it's probably a year ago actually that,
that we were talking about it.
But in the, um, 23, 24 year,
um, we made a commitment to four kind
of key areas of cost savings.
I think the, the annual reduction in our,
in our baseline was 106 million per annum.
Mm-hmm. And that was, that was broken up
between four key components.
So there was the enabling services, that was our
back office, um, uh, services, uh,
driving efficiency and effectiveness, um, improvements.
There was asset stewardship where we were wanting
to maintain our assets in a more efficient way.
Yeah. Uh, they were optimizing our services,
which I think speaks to this particular question.
Uh, and then there was a, a very small efficiency gain
that we were seeking from frontline services.
Uh, so in that optimizing our services space,
what we were seeking to do was use an evidence base.
What what are the most effective services based on
re-offending rates based on, um, both recidivism index, um,
and the, um, rec recidivism quotient,
and where does each of those services fit within
a rehabilitation, um, focus, a reintegration focus
and a constructive activity focus.
How that then drove the services that we decided
that we would either reduce, turn off
or increase, um, in, in terms
of provision was very much at the heart of that part
of our savings initiative.
Alongside that, as you'll be aware, uh,
there was an investment in rehabilitative services
for remar, which I spoke about in, in my, um, sort
of opening remarks and,
and I think the overall net decrease in the
services space as we identified things
that were duplicative, not particularly well used,
or there was no solid evidence base for continuing
with them, was about half of
that component made up optimizing our services, uh,
the, the efficiencies.
So, uh, in, in the grand scheme of things,
what I think we are seeing, uh, and I'll get Dr.
Juanita Ryan to sort of talk, talk to this in terms
of the performance, uh, aspect.
What are we actually seeing in, in numbers?
Uh, I'm, I'm pretty comfortable, uh, given
that we haven't seen a material reduction in the, um,
completion rates of those services.
And that, apart from some of our, um, low touch alcohol
and other drug services, which was, uh, anticipated
because we were going through a reset
and we wanted to make sure those services were really
driving results, uh, I think,
I think we are demonstrating we got the right balance.
Um, we turned things off
that weren't being used particularly effectively
and we've doubled down on
the things that have greatest impact.
So the numbers are sort of maintaining, um,
even though we've produced the overall expenditure.
But I might just ask, can I just,
Just before you move Yeah, yeah.
But that, that saving that you made, which is about half
of the optimizing band Yep.
That's going back into the same provision
of rehabilitation reintegration services or is it
There was a saving elsewhere?
There was a saving and there was a new investment
into organization.
So, um, a saving handed back mm-hmm.
An investment brought in two, two separate bits
of the financial puzzle.
I guess that's, it's not as easy for me
to say it was reprioritized, it was given
and then we received, I think is the
right way to describe those two. Well,
And also to say to note that we,
I've got notes from the chief
financial officer, so Okay, cool.
I just, I just say we hadn't drawn down on that
until when, like it's not until this financial year
that we're actually drawing down on that.
Were you gonna say something?
I was just gonna, um, uh, show the committee that in terms
of the actual services themself and the health
and rehabilitation context, uh,
the last financial year compared to the one
before, uh, we actually had, uh, more access to services,
more people accessing those services.
And that's including across, uh, um, medical nursing, uh,
our psychology high intensity programs, our A OD programs
and our medium intensity offense focus programs. Is
That 'cause you've moved to a much
more brief, brief intervention?
Uh, no, no, not at all.
But we have really focused on how we can maximize access
to the most impactful programs
and we've put a concerted effort
and focus in on that, which has helped us shift to see some
of the good results we're seeing
with more people accessing those services.
Mm-hmm. In terms of the comment that you made
around the mental health services, uh, our internal team,
so we've previously had a model of contracted services
and internal mental health teams.
Mm-hmm. We undertook a review,
which was always on the card from the moment we set up the
contracted services to make sure
that we had the best possible combination of services.
What we found in that review is
that we had a disconnected services with internal
and external services running concurrently, uh,
and a much more effective
and efficient approach would be to bring in-house most
of our mental health services.
Uh, so what has happened is,
although we've got at least a thousand more people
who have benefited from our internal mental health services
as we've reduced and,
and, um, dialed down the contracts for the external, um,
services, they're, um, they have reduced, uh, the number
of people that we're seeing, but that resource is going
to be plugged right back and it has been plugged right back
into our internal services.
So, so we should see a lift up again
in the current financial year.
But can you understand from a, like if you've put
that on a, on a table on a a three piece of paper, it
doesn't always look like you're providing as much as
you could or should when you look at the finances as well.
Uh, and I understand there's a transition Yeah.
And it is complicated,
but are you kind of, um, satisfied that the way
that you're reporting it reflects
what you are saying here today,
which seems quite optimistic,
but doesn't always look
that optimistic when you look under foot.
Definitely we're seeing a positive trajectory
of increase in access to those important services,
and you are right, we could do more
and we are focused on ensuring that we
maximize the resources we have
to ensure the people in our prisons are accessing those
services at the rates
that we'd expect based on our targets. Yes.
One, just one brief example, maybe if I may.
Um, one of the things that Dr.
Dr. Ryan is, um,
focused on is looking at the upfront needs assessment, um,
as someone is brought into custody
and the initial assessments
and the amount of resource allocated to that to ensure
that we have a significant understanding of that, that need.
There is a, I think a view, I think it's validated in terms
of some of the work that his, um, uh, Dr.
Ryan's team have done, that there is perhaps a better, um,
spread of that service so that more might be accessing,
uh, more of that service.
That resource can go to the highest,
most complex need rather than, um, not,
not quite the triaging
that we might aspire to in the future.
So I think we are seeing there's room
for further improvement, uh, to ensure
that we are really making best use
of some pretty specialist resources in our,
in our custodian environment. Okay.
Thank you. I'm going Mr. Stevenson. Thank you.
Um, just obviously talking here about strategic financial
management one, one tool you've now got is this long term
network configuration plans.
I'm keen just ask you a few questions about that.
I think we've probably all agree here
that there's probably been under investment, uh,
in corrections over a number of years
and this is obviously a 20 year plan that looks to try
and better, um, get a grip on what's gonna be needed.
So I'm keen just to understand a bit more about, um,
have you obviously put this in place,
are you now putting costings against what's gonna be
required over that 20 years?
Um, and are you kind of looking at, um,
what are the different, um, scenarios investment isn't made
or under investments made and yeah.
How are you gonna be using this plan and then,
and reporting it back to, to us,
but also I suppose New Zealanders?
Yeah, sure. Uh, yeah, a critical, um, element
to our long-term, um, and our short-term planning.
So, um, that long-term network configuration plan is the
infrastructure part of our view
of the world into the future, um, next 20 years.
Um, what that does is it says, um,
we have a particular focus on high security capacity
and we've got some attributes of that high security capacity
that we wanted to make sure were documented for that, for
that 20 year time period.
We then went about identifying the,
the locations within our existing network.
We've got 18 prison sites across the network,
15 men's prisons, uh, and three women's prisons.
And we identified which sites had the potential
to receive some additional capacity.
And I'll just talk to some of that
because, uh, you'll be aware why qia mm-hmm.
Was one of those early developments.
And the long-term network configuration plan enabled us to
determine the suitability and,
and appropriateness of expand further expansion
of that new development.
So 810 additional, uh, places at Yia,
the second location, Christchurch men's prison,
um, four phases.
So, uh, I think the long-term network ation plan is su super
helpful 'cause it ensures that we can see the, the sort
of maximum size of the high security accommodation
that we might feel comfortable at any individual site
and then gives us the opportunity to progressively build out
that capacity over ultimately,
I guess the 20 years of, of the plan.
Phase one and phase two.
Currently in procurement only phase one,
the first 250 beds has been funded at this stage.
So that's, that's what we are, um, sort of progressing with.
But that enables as that first phase like we did with Wikia,
is to build a lot of the, uh, additional ancillary
and amenity services.
So a gatehouse full site secure perimeter.
There's lots of staff amenities for the entirety
of the development in the first couple of phases.
We are, we are therefore investing in the long-term whole.
And as you get to the last couple of phases, you start
to only then need
to deliver the residential accommodation for prisoners.
Why kid expansion's a great, uh, example of that phase one,
the 500 places plus the 96 mental health, huge amount
of investment in staff amenities, uh,
additional accommodation for, um, the prisoner populations,
the expansion, just residential accommodation of 810.
So, so really, really strong planning capability.
And then Hawke's Bay, uh, the reason, um, we are progressing
with what we're calling the accelerated capacity project
for Hawkes Bay, an additional 316 places in Hawke's Bay is
that was another site which was identified in the long term
plan, which was appropriate for, uh,
capacity increases in the long term we'd like to be able
to retire some
of the high security old high security assets.
Uh, but at the moment we are starting
to build the new high security.
Uh, so we're, we are now in partnership in, in contract
with Nala, loves our partner, um, progressing that
and that will come on stream in early 2027
because we can see the potential
for some population pressures in the short term based on
justice set projections.
So we've got a plan, we are then able to adapt that plan
and activate bits of the plan
to see smart investments in the right locations
that like keep,
keep us moving in the right direction despite what happens
with population increases and decreases.
If there was a period in the future
where perhaps the population wasn't growing at the same
rate, it, it's at the moment,
then we could start contemplating retiring some
of the 2,200 places that, that we think, you know,
in the medium term would be better to start being, um,
thought of as retiring assets
as new new capacity being built.
You go a from prison, you'll be aware, sorry,
Auckland Prison, just finish off with is,
is currently being looked at from a fast track consenting
process perspective, again, not any immediate plans
to develop capacity in that location,
but Right for us to activate parts of, uh,
the legislative environment to give us preparedness
and resilience should we need to make fast
or more, more, more rapid decisions about
future growth in into the future.
So build resilience, I think is probably the best way
to describe it, giving us those tactical options
that we know still make sense with a long term plan.
You right with that. Right. We're gonna have
A last question on strategic financial management from
Ms. Paul.
Um, just on the, you you were just talking about the, uh,
edia expansions and my understanding is
that the edia expansion will be for women. Is that
No, no, no.
Um, what we have already done, um, is, is um, looked
to bring online, uh, to separate units, um,
which are very much separate physically, very much separate
because as you all know, a very large site, um,
separate from the new campus for the, for the men.
And it's enabled us to house, um, women, uh, in,
you know, good location suitable for, um,
where they might be released to in the bay of Plenty
or the Y cattle where we don't have a women's prison, um,
in good accommodation,
but they are, um, still connected to Auckland, um,
women's corrections facility.
That's the, that's the management.
So again, Lee or Kim can maybe talk to that specifically.
Oh no, that's helpful. That, that covers that.
I've just got another quick one.
Um, so half, about half
of your sales at the moment are double bunked, um, across
what men's and women's prisons with your investment?
No. 'cause this is about the, yeah. Prison capacity.
Um, well that's the next section.
Well can I just ask it now? Yeah, thank you.
Get out the way. Um, when you eventually increase the prison
capacity, will you make any commitments
around reducing the number
of double bunk sales throughout the network?
What, what we, uh, what we always do is balance our, um,
responsibilities to safely house people, um, in, um, prison,
um, accommodation
and be able to continue
to receive people, um, into our custody.
So we don't have a choice, um, of saying we're we're full.
Um, so, so that is a really important part,
the flex of our system.
Uh, what we do, what we do do is ensure that
where we are double bunking, uh,
we have appropriately configured cells.
So a double bunked cell is designed
for having two prisoners within it.
So that's a physical infrastructure part of the puzzle.
And then there is a very explicit operational part,
the puzzle around ensuring the safe sharing of cells.
Um, so that's maybe the thing that we wanna,
Do you like double?
Like do you, do you think there's value,
value in double bunking or
Not? For some people,
yes.
There, there is definitely, um, value in it.
I, I wouldn't say everyone wants to be double bunks,
but for some people who might be vulnerable,
need someone else, um, with them in a cell environment,
it can actually be a positive thing for some. Um,
Have you, have you had much staff feedback on double one
King and what they, what your offices
think about that? That's fine.
Um, I mean I, I think it would be varied.
Um, but the, the feedback we would receive would,
would be varied in, in the,
in the way in which I've just described it for some, uh,
prisoners, they aren't particularly wanting
to be double bunks.
Um, but we go through a very clear assessment process
to ensure safety and for some
our staff would say it is a really important part
of creating the safest environment
that people have the operation.
Yeah. Just quickly, If I may, thank you just,
I think there's a couple, couple important
points to, to make here.
One is I think we would have mixed views
from staff. There are numbers
Of staff that do see the benefits of
that in selling people together
or a range of reasons, companionship, um, safety or reasons.
I, I do want to touch on, uh, you asked
around the reduction in the use of, of double bunking.
So we don't use all double bunks at all times.
Um, when there is opportunity, we do often retain
that second bunk for what we call disaster recovery beds.
So we maintain capacity across our network should there be,
um, a, a significant, an earthquake
or a big disaster, a natural disaster of sorts.
And we need to relocate people in numbers.
We create capacity to have resilience across our network.
So we have those, so we try
to maintain those within the network, but it ebbs
and flows depending on geographic demand.
So I would rather than move people
to somewhere away from home region home house them as close
to home as possible to maintain those familial connections
and then keep other capacity elsewhere as we need.
So it ebbs and flows and changes all the time. Right.
I've got a question from on Duncan.
We are on PRI population guys, so
Yeah, we're, yeah. Or
to supplementary, I think I'm interested in your comments
around double bunking because um,
I mean you'd hardly say you, you,
you've got people double bunking, six square meter cells
or least you have had people double bunk in six square meter
cells in the cargo, um, according to your written questions.
Um, and you've also got people double bunk
where they've got 93 centimeters room to sit up in,
which gives you about, if it's me about two centimeters
above my head, it's pretty claustrophobic.
But anyway, one of my, my question is really this.
If you look at your double bunking figures across different
prison populations, you've got some that are up
to 84% double buck,
which is pretty much nearly everyone, right.
Um, and others which are really low, some outliers at 4%,
um, and a lot around 20
or 30%, how was it reasonable
to have a prison which is 84% double bunked,
whereas in other prisons you've got a much, much lower, um,
proportion of the double bunking putting aside, um,
maximum security, which is zero double bunk. Yeah.
Yeah. I I think Lee has, um, already framed up the answer
to that question in terms of the decision making process
and where you, you experience loads.
So you, you might just wanna touch on the why for,
I, I think it's really important to note that most
of our prisons have different purposes within the network.
So you are obviously highlighted maximum security.
We don't, uh, double bunk maximum
security prisoners for obvious reasons.
So you'll see a lower rate in that environment.
But if you look at some of our,
what we call our end destination
or our low security environments, so prisons
with predominantly lower security open environments,
they are normally single bunked.
It's normally the high security areas. So sites that have to
Would presumably be two that are low double bunking.
Yeah. To, they've gotta be 84% double bunk at Northland.
Is that a sustainable degree
of what's essentially overcrowding?
I I would disagree that it's overcrowding.
I think, um, we are, we're probably creating, uh, an image
that people live in these cells 24 hours a day.
That's not the case that reside them sleep on a night,
especially the northeast facility.
The predominant, uh, period
of the day is outta cell within the unit environment.
So you, just to confirm,
you're telling me Norton Corrections facility, most
of a prisoners' time has been outside the cell?
Yes, during the day, during the unit routine,
during operating on lock hours, the period
of the day will be out of the cell.
Okay. I'm going to take one more call from, uh,
Ms. Paul on double bunking and then I'm going to Mr. YCT.
Mine's a quick one. Um, so I
understand you guys are doing a review.
Oh, is it, is you, have you finished the review on cra you
know your, I'll come back to you tool
and if so, what did you find in respect to the comments, um,
that Duncan's just made as well?
Uh, so we've got two reviews underway at the moment.
We've got an initial review on the application
of it across the critical events.
Uh, that review is in draft. I haven't seen that yet.
It's due with me this month.
Um, so we're aware in that imminently we've got a broader
systemic review over the use of, uh,
risk assessments in debunking,
and it's being commissioned by our chief custodial officer.
And we expect the results of that early next year,
but that's taken a much more broader system view.
Right. Mr. White, Thank you. Thank you. Um, Mr.
Chair, um, I given that the, um, in your,
in your opening statement that the focus is, um,
in the spaces on the over incarceration of Maori
and the impact of current government policies on this.
And you've talked a little bit about gy, um,
been a COPA rather than a method, uh, in regards
to overrepresentation.
How have policy changes under this particular government,
under this current government made it easy
or harder to achieve your desired goal?
To do, to reduce Maori overrepresentation, uh,
in the correction system?
Um, for example, uh, uh, scrapping funding
for section 27 reports
To Mr. White. We, we've got another
And sentencing gangs, legislation,
and reinstating the three strikes law.
Have you seen those particular pieces of legislation
actually increase, uh, the amount of people in prison?
Um, or have you seen a decrease
and now you on target to, um, address the over incarceration
of mine before whatever your time is?
And do you have a time?
No, we, we don't have a, have a time.
What I, what I would say may,
maybe at a whole level organizational level is
from a remand, um, part of our, uh, prison population.
Um, we do watch the proportion of the remand as, as per
as it relates to the sentence population,
because that is the part of the system
that can cause disruptions, um, takes people out
of normal day-to-day work.
Um, so watching what's happening in
that remand space is really important for us.
What we have seen, um, has been a growth in proportion
of those remanded into custody until the second half
of this calendar year.
Um, so we saw a growth, um, rising up to, um, 40,
44% in 2024, um, dropping down in June of this year
to 41.7% in the total prison population.
Uh, and as of, um, today we're down at 38.6%.
So we we're seeing some interesting changes,
would be the best way for me to describe it at the moment.
We don't, we don't quite know enough at the moment as
to what's maybe driving some of those changes.
But we are seeing an increase in the sentenced
and proportion who are sentenced versus the remand
population for the last six months.
Did you believe that's because of some of the,
Of changes, Mr.
Push you by the, can we, I think it's two.
I'm gonna come back to you when we get to this section.
We've got 20 minutes on over representation.
We were talking about prison
population and particularly women.
So I haven't had one answer on a question on women.
So I'm coming now to document cl. Thank you.
Um, and with, with women in mind, I've gotta ask that
as my second question 'cause I'm gonna sneak two and in one.
But, um, obviously this last year, the annual report, uh,
and the theme of it has been that the system is under a lot
of pressure due our increase branch numbers of prisoners.
Um, and I think we finished the year most about 800 more
prisoners than what the, um,
government's own planning assumptions were based on.
Um, so to manage that pressure,
obviously we talked briefly about that they've had
to close some beds, um,
and that they've had to be, that you've had to reopen beds
that were previously, um, closed
because by definition they weren't up to up the standard.
Um, so that's created an environment where,
uh, we hear back through the people that we engage with
of increased tensions of increased, uh,
prisoner on prisoner, prisoner on staff assaults.
Um, so I can imagine it's a really tense environment
and you can't build your way out of that in the meantime
or plan your way out
because of, you know, the 20 year plan is a long way off.
What sort of thresholds have been changed operationally
to deal with that.
Um, and whilst you are thinking about that,
and I'm thinking about response to your written questions,
when you've said that there would be some changes to
thresholds, we've talked about double bunking
and release time must be one of them as well.
But I just want you to round that out.
But for women in particular, um,
Well, why, why don't you answer that question
and we'll come to the next one, right?
Yeah, I'm just, I'm, I'm actually answer that, um,
giving a consideration as to what has changed.
Um, can I, I just touch on a comment that was made
around, uh, feedback.
You say that assaults are
increasing, that's not what we're seeing.
So we've seen, whilst the overall net number of assaults,
uh, appears to have increased,
and we believe on the back of our encouragement
of accountability and reporting gross, the,
the gross numbers, the, the, sorry, the, the categories are
In the non-serious non-injury
where we've seen the minor increase.
Mm-hmm. But our serious prisoner on prisoner
and prisoner on staff assaults year
to date have significantly decreased.
Mm-hmm. Um, we are seeing, um, the, the,
and the prisoner on prisoner, um, uh, assaults.
There is a bit of a nuance in there.
So whilst we see, uh,
a serious prisoner on prisoner assault number decrease at
the finer end, through the complexity of introduction of,
of many of the youth gangs, we're seeing a bit
of severity on the lesser number of incidents.
But in to, in total, what we're seeing is
that prison environment is becoming safe. Okay.
But, but just answering that question, um,
I think the question was, have any of our regimes
as a result of the physical environment
with the increased numbers in our women's prisons, have they
changed full stop materially in the way in which we're, uh,
presumably running unlocks or giving access to services?
My thought, no. I think they've actually,
anything we've got any other one improved
'cause of the staffing numbers and,
and the increased, um, staff
that we've now been able to secure. And
With regard to women in particular,
we know it's a complicated situation.
Yeah. Um, that
and the increase in,
in the female population, it was quite stuck.
And I know again, that it's situation,
but it looks like over, even over the last year,
it's very few of them, the starting programs,
there was hardly any, you know, it's,
when you look at women compared to men, very, there seem
to be quite a difference in,
in her starting programs who's finishing programs.
That's not, that's not my sense. Alright.
Maybe, maybe Kim and Juanita, um, and I,
That's due to just the increased numbers, whether it's
Gonna get, she's gonna get answer.
I think also the remand, the remand part
of the women's population being a predominant increase, uh,
drives that differential, if you like, between those
who are accessing the criminogenic rehabil rather than the
physical and maybe some of the mental health
services at the front end during Ramon. So,
Mr. Chair, I, I've got a
question
that probably you could probably
be answered all at the same time.
Can I just quickly do that with your generosity?
Thank you very much. Um,
Hold all of those up. Look,
just, just the, just the number on, um,
on the increase of, of women in, in prisons,
the numbers I have in front of me is 24% from 6,774
to 837 in the last 12 months.
What extra investment has corrections received
to provide rehab
and reintegration programs in light
of the rising prison population?
Okay. Given that also one of the answers we had earlier was
that there's been an increase in internal programming,
but actually been a decrease in external
organization support.
Okay. So you've got two questions
there, right? Yes. Let's,
Let's see If we get an answer. Give Mr. Chair.
I will attempt to answer them the best I can.
Please redirect me if need to you. The
Oracle. Thank
you. Um, I think firstly in response to the number
of women accessing interventions, that absolutely is to do
with the higher percentage
of remand we see in the woman's population.
Mm-hmm. Um, so remand population is
around about 52, uh, percent.
It did increase up to about 58, 50 9% earlier this year,
but has since decreased.
Mm-hmm. So, as part of optimizing our services
and with the recent legislative change, um,
that is a focus area for us, uh, fortuitously
and the women's network.
Um, our remand population is a 50 50 split
between remand convicted and remand accused.
Mm-hmm. Which means we have an opportunity to work
with those remand convicted women
as those interventions come online.
And that's a piece of work that we are working across the
network and with our intervention providers, um, support
with around what interventions will work best.
The other thing that's important to call out is,
obviously we only have 3.1 if we talk about
sites available to us.
Yeah. So it's incredibly important for us as a network
to take that collective view.
So making sure, particularly with our smaller sites,
we can't offer all programs to everyone.
It's just not good economies of scale.
Um, or to have one
or two women on a program, we need to make sure
that we are being really planned around thinking
what a woman's pathway is through our, our network
and our system, and how we can support their journey
to make sure that one, they have timely access to justice
and two that they have, um, are ready
for parole eligibility.
Ben, did You answer? Yeah.
Well then the specific, I think you women's examples may be
a big one around, um, the remand convicted women
who are now able to access to orang
and to w um, which is an A OD program delivered as part
of an eight week 16
or 24 week pro, uh, program based on level of need.
So those things, I, I was talking earlier about
the investment in rehabilitative services
to those on remand, which is a change to our normal,
to our previous settings.
So, money coming in to enable us
to dedicate focus from the beginning
of this financial year on remand convicted
people, men and women.
Uh, what we have done is identified the opportunity
to invest at Auckland Women's as a site
where there is clear need
and there is capability from a service provider perspective
to ensure that we're giving a range of different, um,
a OD intervention links based on the length
of time someone is likely to be with us during
that remand convicted period.
'cause that's some of the challenge in the remand convicted
space is how long
is someone gonna actually be with us during that time.
So, so I would say that's green shoots at the moment,
but it's early days.
And as I said in my opening remarks, what we are keen
to do is ensure that we start in a really kind of purposeful
and plan way to learn, rather than assume
we've got it all right at the outset.
And it's really important that we understand.
We've got one more women's
Question here and, and just don't go away.
I Right. I'll stay right
Here. And just to,
to further that, um, that's all prospective.
Um, what else have you turned your mind to,
or what else are you planning to do
that's perhaps a little bit more short term?
Mm-hmm. We know the huge impact on family separation.
Mm-hmm. We know that there's only 3.1 sites, by definition.
People are away, women are treated.
Um, it, it's just more harsh to be in prison.
I think if you're a woman away from family,
particularly if you're a parent
and children, what else is corrections doing
that doesn't require a year
and a half of review process
to redesign the rehabilitation suite of programs
before anything can happen to make that better?
'cause there are options. What
else are you turning your mind to?
Okay. Um, so I can talk to some very tangible things.
I think firstly it's important to acknowledge your comment
around, particularly a lot of our women will continue
to run their household while they're inside
that custodial environment.
So I absolutely hear what you are saying around some
of the challenges that our women face.
Um, I feel very proud to be part of an organization
that's recognized the importance
of lifting our women's prisons out
and creating their own network of which I am the kaki of
for this moment in time.
So for me, that's a really tangible effort to go.
Actually working with women requires a different approach.
Um, there will be some similarities,
there will also be some differences.
Having our own network means that we are able to consider
exactly what it looks like from a trauma
and gender informed, culturally responsive approach,
and then how we as a network can maintain
that consistency across.
Uh, the other thing we've done organizationally is had a
specific strategic strategy that's focused on working
with women called, um, um,
we're on our third iteration of that.
We launched that in October 25.
The first, um, iteration was in 2017.
And there hasn't been a gap.
And we've learned through each of those iterations on
where we are focusing on, um, importantly
for this iteration, the strategic plan has three main areas.
One is our staff and looking at the capability,
the leadership, the learning
and development, the practice uplift that we need, um,
to make sure is prioritized in order to be gender
and culturally responsive and trauma informed.
The second part of that is our support foreman.
And again, touching on that, um, access to, uh,
timely interventions from a justice perspective, looking at
what, uh, an integrated network looks like
and also, um, uh, access to interventions.
And then the third and new, and
I think, and I think, sorry Kim, just the support
to the women stay connected to file and,
and involvement in planning where possible.
So I think that's been a, a very strong focus that you
and the leadership those three sites have.
And that, that those, I don't know.
I'm going to, I'm gonna go Yes, absolutely.
Now to the most patient woman re
who's been waiting a long time.
Yeah. I have about four questions
that I wasn't able to ask, but that's okay.
Thank you. Um, hi everyone. I'm sorry I can't be there.
I guess you can hear the sta of my voice.
Um, just supplementary to what you just said, um, uh,
with respect to those that are taking up, um, the, the, um,
the rehabilitation on remand, what's the plan with respect
to tracking, um, those that have completed those programs
and re-offending?
Sure. Um, well,
I believe I might, right?
Um, between our data and insights specialist
and our, um, uh, rehab, um, services specialist through,
um, Dr. Ryan, I believe that the three
or the two programs I mentioned at Auckland Women's, uh,
the a OD treatments, we will track starts.
We will track completions,
and we know the efficacy of those,
those services, if you like.
So I, I don't know whether there's a, an easy way describe
what we will measure other than, other than around that.
Is that happening now? Yes. Yep.
Anyone wanna talk on that? Or are you happy?
Do you wanna come up or not? I can briefly talk about it.
Yeah. Yeah, you go, I'll give you your own microphone.
Just talking at a gen general level about effectiveness and,
and how we, how we see these sorts of programs.
Well, one of the major ways
that we measure effectiveness is
through the rehabilitation quotient, which is
where we look at a group of people who completed the program
and we look at a matched, statistically matched cohort
of people who've not completed the program
and compare at a very basic level, we compare the outcomes
for those two groups of people
to determine whether the programs had a benefit or not.
Um, we will be able to do that for everyone who has been
through the program, and once enough people have done it in
remand, we should be able to determine whether
doing it in remand leads on to further benefits
and in perhaps in other programs, people are, are able
to do, um, during their time as a sentence prisoner
or post-release.
It's just we need a significant quorum of people
before we can start doing that analysis.
Right. Rema, you've got another question.
Thank you. So that, so that's a conscious effort.
That's great. Um, the other question, please,
if you don't mind, um, with respect to you, you, some
of your opening comments, um, Jeremy,
you spoke about the 96, um, extra beds in Edia within
that dedicated space for mental health.
What does that look like practically?
Like, um, how separated are they from normal beds?
What goes on there that doesn't go on in,
in the normal areas?
Sure. Um, I'll ask Dr.
Melissa, Ryan up as well, just just to talk
to the, the specifics.
But, uh, physically, um, it is a very separate part
of the new facility.
Um, has, uh, significant distant geographic distance from
the, uh, other residential parts of that, that new prison.
So I think that's the first really important
point to, to note.
Secondly, uh, the configuration, the,
the physical attributes of that unit are quite different,
uh, to how we would view,
if I describe a normal high security
or even, uh, an intensive supervision unit
where we might be looking after some of the higher,
more higher acuity, uh, mental health, um, people, uh,
people in a, in a prison environment.
So physical infrastructure does look quite different,
and it is very separate from the main accommodation.
From a staffing perspective, uh, we have got, uh,
a very higher level of, uh, clinical support.
Um, and I think the, the strong thing that I want
to talk about maybe today is the work we have done
with our colleagues in, um, health New Zealand fact order,
uh, and with the Ministry of Health to ensure
that this can be seen as, um, part of a wider system, uh,
to ensure that if people continue to have heightened levels
of acuity to the point where they need
forensic mental health support, they can go offsite, um,
to gain, to gain that support
and to maybe gain a degree of stability,
but then come back to us, uh, in an environment
where we can realistically start to stabilize some
of those attributes in a, in a,
in an appropriate environment from a staffing
and infrastructure perspective.
And, and in addition,
I think we can manage some people's acuity levels to a point
where they perhaps were on a trajectory
to need forensic mental health support that we can manage
down to a level that negates their needs
to be transitioned offsite to forensic mental health.
It's not dissimilar to the approach we've taken
with physical health where we've got dialysis machines in
the way kid facility.
The advantage of that
for physical health perhaps is obvious.
We are able to manage a person on site.
It reduces the need for health escorts offsite
to a hospital environment.
It reduces the need then for that place to be made available
and for the inherent risks that exist
for everyone when you move someone outside of
that secure perimeter
and into sort of a community environment.
So, so I think those are some of the fundamentals,
but from a staffing, uh, approach, maybe particularly the,
the way in which we've thought about that, we've got a,
we've got a lead role that looks after that whole unit.
Juanita just talking, maybe talking to some of that. Yep.
Uh, sure can. So yeah, we have a, um, uh, a,
a director role that is responsible
for the particular mental health
and addictions unit with the 96 fees,
but also for the outreach services at both Tonga level
prison and Spring Hill Prison.
Um, we have a, a significant number
of mental health practitioners working at this site.
So I fixed this was, the real intention was for this
to be a step change to how we've operated elsewhere.
Uh, and we are still in the process
of recruiting to those roles.
We've also worked with for some Maori mental health
practitioner specialist roles to support the men on
that site with their pathway towards wellness.
Um, there is a, there are four, uh,
aspects to the unit, if you like.
One of them, we have established a high intensity alcohol
and drug program for men in high security.
So that's the only one in the country.
So it was really important that particular group had
access to those services.
The second unit is about that intensive support, uh, uh,
approach, as Jeremy said, for those
who are quite acutely unwell.
Um, and the third unit is a step down unit.
So as we're supporting people
to transition back into the mainstream prison, um,
not wanting that to be such a sudden shift from a,
an intensive support, um, unit into that process to have
that transition into there.
Importantly, what we've done differently in this unit
to other places in the country, which speaks
to our strong relationship with our health colleagues,
is 13 beds in that unit have been agreed to be ring fenced
so that our forensics colleagues can use them either
for people who are waiting for a bed in forensics
or as people are returning to the prison.
So we are really trialing some quite different things there
that we are looking to try and replicate if they work
well in other contexts. Okay.
Now I'm gonna go Thank you. I'm gonna go to Mr. Paul.
Hopefully everyone realize we're on rehabilitation.
Yeah, right. Yeah. Then I'm gonna come over to Mr.
Please. Nice. Um, cool.
Um, so my question is for Dr. Ryan.
So, um, I love going to the and ton prison.
Those, um, psychologists are incredibly, um,
and their success rates are pretty amazing.
And I see your background is all in
psychology and stuff like that.
Um, the pay equity claim
for corrections psychologists was, um, canned as part
of the, um, changes to the budget this year.
How has that impacted your ability to recruit
and retain psychologists?
'cause they're pretty amazing the ones that I've met.
Thank you. I think they certainly are too, actually.
Uh, I mean, it's the, it it's hard to know, uh,
with the field what, uh,
what is constantly impacting on their decision to, uh, come
and work for us or to work somewhere else.
We have the highest turnover of any of our health
and rehabilitation staff in psychology,
and that's, that's a, that's a constant, um,
because they're so specialists in, in such high demand, uh,
it's not surprising that they'll often find opportunities,
uh, elsewhere or be poached
for opportunities, um, elsewhere.
Uh, and we have a high number of our more senior staff
that tend to go into private,
private practice once they leave us.
So it's hard for us to dis disentangle, uh,
one particular aspect from the many other things.
We are really pleased though, with, we are at a net gain
of psychologists compared to last year.
So we've, we had I think seven more psychology roles
and, sorry, 17 more psychology roles
in the last financial year.
This year stood up, um, last year, sorry.
And we are at an overall net gain.
So we're actually winning when it comes to the number
of psychologists that we are
recruiting into the organization.
And that number being against suggest
that we are retaining them in a better
way than we have in the past.
Mm-hmm.
You very quick. No, no, no. I've got over here.
Stop The same line.
Same line. You've got another line.
I'll give you one on That. Alright. You so go.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chair.
Just, just on that, um, I, I want to know how, how much
training has the psychologist, I know you,
my wife's a psychologist
and I know that, um, you,
you've got done your psychology degree.
How, how much training have they done in terms of, uh, uh,
t Maori and ensuring that that part is,
I don't know whether, uh, whether there's any kind of, um,
training for staff that interact with, with our,
with the wau in prisons
and how much training have they done in terms of,
and a whole lot of other that, that may help
with the rehabilitation and reintegration without,
I think that's just spun out from
just psychologists, right?
Well, rehab, I
Think, I think it's all tied
in because I'd like to know how
Up, I'm, I'm not stressing Extrapolation the answer.
I dunno if we was to check, uh, into the member, um,
specifically around the psychology team.
Uh, we are, we are fortunate to be able to run, um,
fortnightly group supervision engagements, uh,
clustered geographically, uh, with the, um, psychologists
and with program facilitators who work alongside, uh,
Juanita and team.
Uh, those are fortnightly dosages.
And then there are quarterly,
what we call cultural learning days,
and they're very much driven by the supervision feedback
between supervisee and, and supervisors.
So we're very blessed to have that arrangement in place
for the psychology cohort.
Now work on how we extend that across our front line.
Okay. Now I'm gonna go to Mr. Rutherford.
I've got three question questioners. So Mr. Rutherford,
Uh, thank you Mr.
Chairman. My questions relating to the announcement
that we saw, um, with the expansion in Hawkes Bay.
How does corrections, I guess, communicate
with the community like Hawkes Bay Bay
and others to ensure
that the residents in those regions sort
of understand the benefits of both the increased capacity,
but also the safeguards that they have so that you,
you can sort of put at ease, I guess, the community
who live there locally who aren't involved in the
corrections space specifically?
Yeah, thank you. I, I, I mean these, these are, um, always
critically important considerations for any development.
Um, we, in our long-term network configuration plan, uh,
more generally concluded it was most appropriate for us
to focus on those locations where
prisons were already established.
Um, I,
I think the relationship at a local level is
perhaps the most important one.
The general manager and the senior leadership team of,
of a site have a responsibility to have a presence
and, uh, a sense of community in the places they operate.
So George Massingham and his team, I know,
are very well connected in that local community.
Um, they will have done, um,
some considerable work in engagement alongside our project
team who have been, I would acknowledge running pretty fast.
It's, it's a, the name is Accelerate Capacity project.
So they've been working pretty fast to ensure
that we've been able to stand up a piece
of work at some pace.
But I know the team together, the project team
and the leadership team at sites are very conscious
of the importance of having
that trusted relationship in location.
And so using those relationships, making sure there's good,
clear lines of communication.
And probably most importantly, there's kind of an open forum
for any questions that people have got, uh, about
what might happen, uh, is, is very much the moment.
Uh, and then probably the final thing I would say is the,
um, the confidence about how the site is run
and the, the way in which that site manages, um,
safety within that wider community context probably speaks
to the relationship they might reasonably expect from
that community, folks on public safety, folks on ensuring
that, um, those in prison, uh, who need to be in prison, um,
are are in that environment.
Thank you. Right.
We're gonna have a reintegration question from
Dr. Duncan Webb.
Yeah. Look, um,
I'm interested in the programs that you've done.
Um, and I've chatted to a number of providers who,
and it, it seems, I'm just interested in your more recent
strategy, which seems to be to consolidate mm-hmm.
Some of those providers.
And first of all,
just interested in you telling us about that.
Yeah. And also whether there's any risks of
using providers which aren't as closely connected
to the communities that are being served as perhaps some
of those smaller providers are.
Any other risks that you might have identified?
Sure. I, I mean, maybe, maybe I get, um, Alice to talk a,
uh, sort of strategic level in terms
of the thinking, be behind that.
Um, and then maybe Sean, um, Mason, who heads up our,
our Community partnerships and Pathways area can,
can talk more of the specifics
around the reintegration services.
But we have definitely been purposeful in the way in which
we are thinking about how we can have greatest impact
and effectiveness, uh,
and the capability of service providers to be able
to deliver the breadth of services, um,
is a key consideration for how we've thought about that.
The point you make is a valid one.
Um, how are we assured that there is a connection
to local community in some of those circumstances?
And that is part of our consideration as to who
to partner, partner with.
And are we seeing some of those attributes present?
But maybe so just get Alice to introduce the, the kind
of conceptual, and then if there's further questions,
Sean can answer those perhaps.
Yeah, I mean,
The point is, right, we have moved to consolidate, um,
based on what we know is working.
Um, the, the evidence is relatively limited
and it's hard to do.
So when you're working with smaller providers, um, we
are in the middle of doing, she like correct me in,
in overarching specific review into our reintegration
service and to understand kind of what's best, um, to kind
of meet the needs that we have,
which you've heard we are kind of discovering, um, more
and more as we get better data.
Um, the other thing that I would say is that we,
it's not all about the contracted provider.
So we are really, um, exploring what
that relationship looks like better
between our case management service
and our probation service, so
that we can seamlessly support someone when they come into
prison and when they leave prison, um,
in the most effective way.
So you would've heard about integrated pathway is a, um,
and, and that's, this is part of it.
Um, it's not just about getting better, um, support
for people before or after prison.
It's about that transition through our, through our service.
So it's not just about contract providers,
but we are specifically looking at that, um,
with intention at the moment.
Um, there's also about our internal workforces.
So Sean is there at, at the table.
And I, and I think, um, particularly just in light of this,
uh, we, we are one agency within a much broader sec,
uh, set of sectors.
And so, uh, ensuring that we are leveraging some of the work
that is being done elsewhere so that we are able
to not be separate from,
but ensure the needs that we can see are present in those
that we support and care for in a custody
or, uh, probation environment are sort of reflected in some
of that, um, consolidation work.
But maybe Sean can talk to some of the work,
um, more recently being done.
Good afternoon, Mr. Chair Committee amendments.
My name's Sean Mason, deputy Chief Executive
of Communities Pathways Partnerships.
Um, two points I was going to make to your point.
Uh, the first was, um,
post our organizational change.
The saw the establishment of, uh, one,
one example of a number
of different roles was a regional reintegration manager.
And the purpose, the purpose of that role, to your point, is
to be able to establish a much more coherent insight over,
uh, the provider landscape
and the needs of the locality in which each of those, uh,
regional managers are, uh, domiciled on occasion that will,
it will make absolute sense
to see a national provider be the solution.
But in many other examples, to Alice's point, um, a,
a more bespoke nuanced approach with, uh,
with providers in localities, uh,
right across the right across the country.
The other point to Jeremy's, uh, uh,
comment there is our integration
through the reintegration managers
and the general managers,
the general managers we've spoken about, uh, previously, uh,
as a, as a, as, uh,
fundamental in achieving our strategic intent is their
integration in the regional public service
commissioner forums.
And so, uh, thinking about
not duplicating our efforts across services,
rather complimenting our efforts across,
uh, our, our services.
So just two particular tangible points off foot.
Can I just ask one, Hey Dan,
I've got two other members of your partner.
This is a, yeah. Just to start,
Just one question.
In terms of success of those services,
do you measure it on the single line whether they go
back into prison or not?
Or do you measure it on a more nuanced way in terms
of the life they lead outside of prison?
It, it is the former rather than the latter.
But returning to the original kind
of conversation about measurement and performance
and the what sits below that impact area line,
that foundation participation, um, that establishment
of a solid connection
and enduring connection is absolutely the stuff
that we are hunting, as you've described at the more
nuanced, um, we have qualitative insights,
but it is not, I wouldn't describe it
at the moment across the board.
And some of the contracts
that we have historically had have been much more in the
quantitative counting domain.
And we are at the moment in a position where we can start
to consider how some of those things might be factored into
future service work.
So the the two I think go hand in hand, um, for, for, for
how we do that better in the future.
Just one other thing. Oh, sorry. Oh,
Sorry. I would also just say
that we are intending
to put a lot more into the IDI to pick up some of
Those insights. So we've
got a supplementary from Dr.
McLennan, and then I'm going to just
While you're here, so efficiency, because I do wanna try
and pivot to this, it's important, um,
because you say at the beginning, Jeremy,
that you don't have any say about who comes to prison,
but with the recidivism rates as high as they are,
you fundamentally, do you know it's about almost half,
um, of the people?
Unless you do it well, unless you do reintegration, well,
you'll be seeing them again.
Um, so it's incredibly important, um,
with the high prison numbers, there's more
and more people being incarcerated away from their home.
So they're being released in areas
that they're not familiar with.
What sort of, um, plans or what have you done?
'cause I'm aware that we are, we're constantly talking
prospectively instead of re retrospectively, um,
to make sure that that is something that you are aware of
and that you've got some smoothing,
not just plans for the future.
But I mean, in preparation for this, I spoke to lots
of reintegration providers
and they're pulling their hair out at having to deal
with people who are released from prison in Christchurch
who have no family support.
There's nothing going on.
And it just feels like there's a big gap
that the corrections are left, that corrections are leaving
Unattended.
I I think, um, Alice, Alice touched,
Alice touched on the point earlier on that the,
the successful reintegration starts with the relationship
with the case manager whilst he or she is in custody.
And so when we are thinking about the chosen community
that the, uh, that the prisoner decides they are relocating
to, then the reintegration engagement starts
with the region in which they're anticipated to relocate to.
And so when we are thinking of what that means, um,
when we think about our regional approach, uh, with, uh,
with CPP is that we will have
probation officers in upper hu routinely engaging
with case managers in Auckland Women's, for example, because
You're confident that that happens.
Why are we hearing so many reports of when
that just doesn't happen when people are
released with nothing?
Well, I, I, I think it's, um, I, we're, we're confident in
so much as we are very intentional about the general manager
networks engaging with the localities.
Um, there, there, I'll acknowledge that there,
there will be exceptions, but,
but in the main, the reintegration pathways begin
with the case manager in collaboration with the,
the individual themselves and or their FAU to the community.
There, there may well though be some reasons why the
individual is not able to relocate,
which you, uh, respect Yeah.
Um, are not able to relocate to the,
to their chosen communities.
But, uh, we are very intentionally, organizationally
around the general manager networks, um,
and the relationships between practitioners
and the site of which he or she is currently res reside in.
Okay. Now we're gonna move to the last major topic.
Um, ma Maori over representation.
Um, so can I, no, no, we, we, we've got 20 minutes for this,
so if you want to direct a question.
Maori, particularly women, are we having
Maori representation or Yeah,
we're moving into Maori representative over representation.
Over representation. Yeah. Yeah.
Do you want the first question? Yeah. Yeah. Cool.
Um, and Nui, I'm conscious that you question I can do mine.
Mine's not on this topic. Last. Okay, go next. Okay.
Um, keen to know about, um,
the Maori leadership board.
Does that still exist within corrections?
No, it's Got one third, no. Okay.
And why not been here?
We, um, together worked to identify what was of
greatest need and impact
and, um, the, the group had met
for a number of years.
Um, and we were, we were not getting good, um,
representation and participation at the group.
Um, and we, uh, established
that it wasn't serving particularly, um, valuable, uh,
sort of role in shifting the
performance of the organization.
Um, so, uh, by agreement, um, we decided that, um,
it was more effective for us to focus in locality,
make sure, as Sean has referred to, that the relationships
and the focus of performance could actually driven in the
places where those relationships could really be stimulated
rather than, uh, a national body that
was really interested in the local, um,
and was not actually, um,
shifting the dial in terms of performance. Much So
Was that, was that, was that, was that because
because their recommendations were not helpful?
Or was it because you guys weren't listening
to their recommendations or
implementing what they were suggesting?
There were, there was just no attendance.
We, we were, we, we were actually, um, sharing lots
of insights in terms of, um, the things
where we felt we could make a difference.
Um, and there were some really committed members
who turned up every, um, every session.
Um, but we, we were collectively finding
that it wasn't really, uh, giving us, uh,
really significant new insights as to
where we might, um, progress.
So we, we moved to close that down
and really focus on those local relationships
that would drive service improvement.
So those local relationships? That's correct.
Uh, kind of, um,
At the, at the 11 regional locations across the country,
so our general managers, uh,
Sean referenced the general manager for Communities,
partnerships and Pathways that has the lead role
for our organization in generating relationships in place.
They're supported by lead advisor Maori partnerships.
Uh, that role is working in Tan with that general manager,
but they're not operating alone.
Um, we have in some locations a number of prison
or custodial general managers
and a general manager for our high order services.
So together, um, they come to, um,
place build relationship
and identify purposeful work together to lift performance.
Um, but the, the CPP general manager is the convener.
They've got the table, they've got presence at the table
for the public service, uh, regional leadership as well.
So ensuring that we as an agency are not assuming that,
uh, other entities be that iwi, NGO
or other are gonna particularly want to just engage with us.
But finding a platform where we can plug into
that the la the discussions that are relevant for
that locality and sort of put our shoulder to
that wheel rather than trying to separate out our, um,
our discussions, uh, outside of that context because Okay.
As we've established foundation participation, that kind of
through care is gonna make the difference in terms
of reducing the number of people we come back in.
Okay. Mr. Titi, just, just a No for you.
You can go, yeah. Thank you. Quick stop on that.
Um, if, if the Maori leadership
partnership boards are not active, then
what have you replaced them with to ensure
that you are getting the, the data
and the information you need?
That's a locality. So, sorry.
In, in localities, so in our regions, ensuring
that we have those substantive relationships
and not every, not every one
of our 11 regions are at the same level,
don't have the same levels of relationship,
but that's what we are focused on to try
and build those meaningful relationships
and where, where it is sought
by us both building some partnerships and,
and signing up to, um,
meaningful agreements where that's relevant.
How are those partnerships going in regards to, to,
to your overall focus on, on Maori over incarceration?
Have you seen a decrease?
Um, 'cause it doesn't seem, it just seems like the,
the prison population is increasing mm-hmm.
Across women and men. Mm-hmm.
And notwithstanding that men are still at 50% of the, uh,
male prison population are Maori, uh, 64%, uh,
female prison population on Maori.
We haven't seen those numbers change for a long time, given
that, uh, we only make up between 19
and 20% of the pop population.
So if this is your total focus Yep.
Uh, or well not total focus,
but if this is a strong focus in, in your annual review,
what exactly are those relationships doing to decrease
and to assist, um, in, in that particular, uh, space.
And I asked some of these questions before
and I, I get where we are now, Mr.
Chair, so thank you for your patience.
Um, so I just wanted to know whether those relationships,
um, have played a part or will play a part in the decrease.
'cause it just looks like it's, um,
the number's not changing
or we are getting an increase there. Okay.
Yep. Yeah, and I would acknowledge the numbers are
not materially changing.
Um, in terms of that proportion that you, you spoke about,
I think our role as corrections as, as has been sort
of alluded to earlier on, is that we look
to make the biggest impact we can, whilst we have people,
uh, in our part of the, the wider system.
Uh, and a lot of that has been in our,
particularly in our prison environment, trying
to connect them to their history, to their wha papa,
making sure that they recognize culture as part of
who they are, making sure
that we have both service providers and our core staff.
You, you talked about psychologists
and how do he talked about some of the supervision there.
But our, our work on is making sure that we've got good
cultural capability in our wider workforce, um,
and making sure that those, uh, sort
of basic aspects are covered across the wider workforce,
working on the, on the front line so
that there's a level of connection.
And then making sure that those relationships
with other partner organizations, um, and Iwi
and hapu are seeing us as being accessible, uh,
and available to connect with as people are traveling out
of our system and into those communities.
So those are, those are the main folks,
but if you look at the data, we're not
seeing a material change.
I, I am suggesting, as I did in my opening remarks, that we
as an organization are, uh, at the, um,
residual end of opportunity of, of making material change,
if I can describe it like that, within the wider, um,
system, uh, we are working with people who are vulnerable,
complex, uh, sometimes violent in behaviors.
And so, so our ability to make swifter material change
as part part of our work is, uh, you know, I need
to be acknowledging the complexity
and the challenge around that thing.
Can, can I ask you a question related to this? Right.
Which I think is another way of asking. Same question.
Question. Is the re-offending rates
for the Maori that go through your system,
are they higher than lower than
other proportionate populations?
Because if you, if you take you
what you said on the face value,
if your schemes were working, then you would see lower
re-offending and therefore the high number of Maori
and Prism would be, 'cause you've got a lot of new, uh,
people committing crimes.
Yeah. So what I'm trying
to understand is whether your
rehabilitation, it goes back to that.
Is that really playing a substantial role?
Or are we just seeing a lot of circling circulation of
existing Maori prisoners
unfortunately going through the system?
Yeah, I think it is the latter. It's the latter.
Um, I, I think it is the latter
and I think there are some core attributes that sort
of describe why that that is part of, part of the, um,
challenge that, that we, that we face in terms
of their responsiveness to treatment.
I think it is comparable, um, to the wider population,
but it is, um, the, what happens afterwards, who,
who are their associates, um, in, in terms of their life
and their lifestyles Yeah.
That are causing that, um, recidivism.
Um, in terms of associations, um, such as gangs and, and,
and other factors, that's a high proportion.
And that's, uh, I think we're starting to see
that age a age out.
So, so some of the older Maori men,
particularly in our custody on, on sentences, um,
they continue to, um, come back, come back in, uh,
but we are seeing fewer young Maori coming into the system.
So, uh, what, what we are, what we are seeing is exactly
as you described, actually, that those that are hard
to shift, um, as a result of many years
of recidivist behavior, um, the, the,
the treatment works in a comparable way to the rest
of the population, but for those associated with gangs
and other, that's what's bringing them back
into the system, unfortunately.
And I, and I, and I think it's about
what else we can do Yeah.
To connect them beyond their part of the system
to a more positive trajectory.
But how do we maybe some other Yeah, no,
That, that's exactly right.
Uh, young Maori coming through in the numbers
that young Maori were coming into prison 20 years ago,
they're coming through with lesser levels
of gang affiliation than previously.
So we have a hardening aging gang affiliated population,
and we've kind of gotta sweat all of our leaders
to see are there ways
of coming at the rehabilitation question
that may be more effective than
what we're doing this time. Okay.
Are, are they the right organizations in regards to, uh,
uh, working in with corrections and, and, um,
and the reintegration back into the communities?
I, I just want to use, uh, um, like for example,
like au mm-hmm.
With the wau outside, um, of prison, um,
and the integration of wau back into those communities
because they're, they're bit more well connected social
services, health, mental health, uh, housing.
Yep. Um, you've got the one stop kinda shop in
regards to the heavy is there,
And that speaks to the conversation we were having
before about reintegration services
and the opportunity we've got at the moment
to contemplate our role within a wider system
as final order is being looked at, well has, has reset, um,
and there's new commissioning entities
and the way in which those services being commissioned
and the navigators, um,
and how they're location across the country, uh, I,
I feel pretty strongly that we shouldn't be doing something
that is disconnected from
that broad pursuit across the system.
So giving us an opportunity to consider how we might
leverage into that environment is very much
the opportunity before us.
We've got services at the moment that are coming to the end
of their contracting periods
and quite significant reintegration services.
And so I think these are exactly the things
that we are wanting to really understand
how we can make a different Okay.
Last question. Last Question. Uh,
Um, well, I think the committee's questions have touched
on big parts of, um, the strong, uh,
guidance guardrails prescription, uh, to go
with the Maori representation equation.
I think to Alice's point, we're open
for understanding those measures
that at a systems performance level drive better
performance, uh, for, um,
firstly addressing key disparities between, uh,
Maori prisoner experience and outcomes and the wider cohort.
Um, but then there are other leaders we can sweat alongside.
Um, smart partnering to your point, um,
do we have the right practice
and permissions set in at the front line?
Um, are we sweeting program
performance, even those that are working well?
Like, can we extract, uh, more gain out of those programs?
And are we, to your point, uh, member, um,
I don't wanna be cavalier with, with man relationships
because many want to form relationships with us
and we're not everybody's cup of tea, so we don't want to,
um, turn our nose up at that.
But by the same token, we owe it to those men
and women to be getting the best possible match of partner
and service provision to their needs.
So all of those details. Right. I'm gonna go to
MS And then we're gonna, we've gotta finish off
with a few other questions. Alright.
Alright. Thank you very much.
Um, can I ask, please, I know that as a, um,
as an organization you'd be working with, you know, ministry
of Justice, ministry of Police, how much work is, um,
undertaken or, or rather corridor
or communications with, um, to uni.
Um, because in hearing submissions from them in the past,
um, and we talk about, uh, accountability settings
for Maori, um, they've often said that they,
they would like more communication with different, um,
government organizations.
Do you converse much with TPK Ministry
of Maori development with respect to this?
Um, Copa
Yes is the, is the simple answer.
And I think, um, two sort of practical examples of that.
Um, the, the first, uh, the, they have come
and spoken to us about, um, final order, um,
and the new commissioning approach that has been taken
with final order, which has, you know, to give,
give the answer I I've given there.
There's also, um, other work that they have done
and they launched from months ago, um, the policy framework.
Um, and, and I think the way in which, uh, we align to
that policy framework, um, is, is another really tangible,
um, demonstration of the role they can play in helping
to inform agencies and certainly us in the way in which we
are thinking about that policy frame.
Um, so again, we had a conversation at our ELT, um,
strategy, uh, meeting three,
maybe three months ago, something like that.
Uh, just receiving that information
and then applying it within our context to see whether
or not there was some things that we could do differently
to, um, have greater impact.
Okay. You right. Thank you.
Alright, now we are gonna do a little bit more random stuff.
So I'm gonna start with Mr. R Buckle.
Uh, thank you. I'm really interested, um,
in your opening remarks,
how buoyant you were about the correction
officers and the retention.
There was a point in time where
that wasn't necessarily the case
and it was also you ran a number of recruitments.
Um, I remember those ad campaigns.
Uh, what, what has changed the, uh, um, to retain,
uh, correction officers
and what, what would we be likely to see,
say in the next six to 12 months?
Obviously with prison numbers increasing,
those correction officers need to be retained
and, uh, is there still gonna be those campaigns happening
to see new correction officers come online?
Sure. Well, thank you. Yes.
Um, I mean, our approach
to ensuring we have the best possible people, uh, to be,
to be that, um, uh,
most critical service provider in our context, I think is
is, is clear for everyone to see.
Um, I'll, I'll ask, uh,
deputy chief executive given capability to, to come up
because, um, she, she had a, a critical role in, uh,
transitioning our recruitment campaigns to stories from the
inside, which you might be, well I,
I I'm not sure which one you're more familiar with.
The, uh, the barbecue, um,
and the comments around certain other professions
or stories from the inside, which has been a really,
really successful campaign in bringing the right sort
of people through, um, as recruits.
Um, and uh, we continue to see on average about 70, uh,
new corrections officers coming in per month,
um, into our system.
So, so I think that gives us, uh, some assurance
that we are still seeing good numbers,
we're still seeing good capability.
We've made some changes, um, in that environment
to reduce the numbers that we are recruiting from overseas,
dialing down that part of our recruitment campaign
and lifting up the domestic recruitment focus.
But maybe, maybe Rebecca, Rebecca,
you could just talk about the, the kind of key aspects
of the recruitment campaign, the numbers,
and then looking to the future.
Sure. Well thank you for the question
'cause I remember you were excited last time when I told you
that, um, since we launched a campaign in February, 2024,
we'd had over 117,000 applications.
So I'm very pleased to say
that we have now had over 150,000 applications since we
launched that campaign and
it's across all of our role types.
And I think last time I was here I said we had about 200
and, well, my notes refer to about 290 vacancies
for frontline corrections officer roles.
And um, as of today we're sitting in about 140.
And so, um, 140 plus we've got another 164 currently
in corrections officer development pathway training,
which means that they'll leading to the frontline soon.
So to say. The campaign was a success
that has been in market for two years now
and it has, um, it has been great.
It is also coupled with, um, changes that are outside
of our control, changes to the labor market, et cetera.
Um, and we have seen turnover really, really stabilized.
So in 2022,
I think it was sitting about 15.4% across the organization,
it's down around 8.3% now.
So some changes underway there.
Now, while stories from the on side was an incredibly
effective campaign, uh, it has been a market for two years.
So we are currently looking at a
refresh, uh, in the new year. Well
Done. Look, well done.
Now I'm going to miss Walden.
Tracy can take my place. Alright. Okay.
It's up to you guys. Alright,
Sorry, quick fire 'cause we are running out of time.
Um, the LT ncps, what's it worth?
What's the dollar figure for the 20 year plan?
Well, I will have to come back to you,
but it's obviously in the billions. Okay,
That'd be great. Out of the gate.
Um, the minister said
18 months ago, two years ago, that
that was something he was going to the,
out, out the gate payment.
That's what it's called, isn't it?
The three, the measly 300 Oh, steps to Freedom.
Steps to Freedom, sorry. Game
Race moment.
Well, I glad we got that right.
Freedom. You have, have a quick fire in,
Remember he said that he was,
that was one thing he'd love to change.
Have you been on his tail about that in the last year?
Um, have, have you proposed anything
through your mechanisms? Don't
Think we have provided any policy advice on that. Okay.
I'll do it from my end, but if you are not,
put a pencil in from your end
and, um, the community infrastructure.
So while you're giving me the, the, um, dollar figure
for the, for the long term plan, can we have a look at
what the community infrastructure, um,
In terms of those facilities that our staff operate,
work from and get, um, people to report into that?
Yep. Yep. You're happy. Thank you. Right now I'm going to
Mr. Stevenson, quick fire on page 45, your annual report.
There's a great little case study on the work you're doing
to support, um, victims
to participate in the parole process.
Hopefully you know what I'm talking about. Yep.
Uh, keen to understand very briefly, a little bit more about
that and what are the results you've seen?
Get up Sean and give a, a snapshot
Because you're picking up people
that actually haven't been that on the formal.
It's an awesome
Effort and I think making a real difference.
Yeah. So just very quickly, this, this initiative is, is,
uh, uh, a joint initiative under the, uh,
victim outcome initiative seeking to be able
to engage those victims who may have either not known
or exercised their right at the time of becoming a victim
to been engaged in the VNR process.
You can see the figures at the bottom of that same passage.
But, uh, we are seeing a number
of victims now actively engaged and
or making submissions to the board and or appearing
or meeting with the board to ensure that their, their,
their representation is being considered by the board prior,
during the hearing taking place.
Yeah. And do you get just very,
and do you get feedback from the victims who have been
through that process about their experience? The
The board Do
Does, yeah. The, the New Zealand
Parole Board do.
Anecdotally we do,
but the, the feedback was predominantly good.
Excellent. Good work on That. And, and,
and I think, um, the Chief Victims advisor, Ruth Money and,
and us, I mean, we are meeting on a regular basis, see
what other refinements
improvements we can make in that space.
Good. Thanks for calling that up. Cool.
I'm going Ms. Paul. Hey,
Peru, we haven't been able
to talk about Peru today, but how's that going?
We listening to people in beginning
to shut it down or what's happening?
Uh,
Ensuring that, uh, it is meeting our responsibilities
and making sure that we are creating the safest possible,
um, environment for the staff who work there.
Um, and that we are, uh,
man managing our legal obligations in that regard as well.
So I think, um, both with physical infrastructure, staffing
and the regimes we are running, uh,
we have made some really important, um, ad adjustments,
the way in which we're operating,
But having the concerns from the ombudsman
and other watchdogs not being necessarily the staffing,
it's been the treatment of the people in Peru.
And hasn't the recommendation been
to close, close the unit down
There have been recommendations to close it down.
We, we are not closing the, the units down.
It is an essential part of, um, our, our overall makeup
of the prisoner state for 15 people, uh, across a population
of over 10,900.
Uh, and what we've soughted to do,
and while reference staff is ensure
that we've got the right number of staff
with the right qualifications to ensure we can run regimes
that are balancing safety
and risk with entitlements of those, uh, in that unit.
But if they thought it work with better staffing,
wouldn't they have just recommended
that you improve the staffing?
And like, I, it's just a bit extraordinary
that you're saying we're not gonna listen
to the ombudsman we're gonna keep doing.
We, we did listen what we're Doing right now,
we took on board, um, the findings,
but we didn't accept the recommendation to close it down
because we are clear that we are lawfully able
to operate the unit in the way we are now.
We have made some changes to that regime,
further enhance the operations
Right now we've gotta go
most person in the world.
Have there been any changes to the management
of people held under public protection orders since the Chi
Chisel case and or the laws mission recommendations?
I don't Think that there have been changes,
but what we obviously are aware
of is the law commission's findings.
And what we are currently doing is looking at that
as a policy piece of work to ensure
that we are in a position to advise the government about
what we might think might be some useful adjustments
and changes to, um, to, to that environment.
Any timelines on that?
Uh, I would've thought it would be one
of our higher priority policy initiatives.
So it'd be in the next year or so.
Anything else? Right. I'm going to miss Nalay.
Uh, hello. Um, again, uh, I was very fortunate
that last year, um,
a bill in my name was passed the corrections Victim
Protection Amendment bill, where essentially, um,
there was a duty on corrections to put measures in place
to make sure that victims
of crime are not con contacted by prisoners.
Um, I know this is off the bat
and I probably should have put this in writing,
but is there any information with respect
to the implementation of those measures?
And if not, I'll just put it as an after hearing question.
Yeah, I don't, I don't unfortunately have, uh,
a quick fire answer to you, so we'll,
we'll happily respond in writing to,
to that question. Yeah.
Okay. Right.
Hey, uh, that draws it to a close five o'clock.
I wanna thank you Mr. Lightfoot
and all your team, um, for being so open.
Uh, we obviously have some specific questions as a follow up
as you probably heard, but, uh, thank you
for joining us this afternoon and going through all of that,
and thank you for that being open right now.
Members, um, online we are gonna go into a private session
Three days. Yep.
Do you want me.